So, the most aggressive plants we've all
learned from childhood is the Venus fly
trap. Oh, yeah. We see it visually and
we fascinated by fascinated. But bust my
bubble here, but can the Venus fly trap
actually count? Absolutely. Uh, don't
say that like everybody knows that.
What? What? Everybody in his lab knows
that. No way. He said that stupid. You
didn't know that? Well, he was talking
to me, not you. Is that a mouse just
going what?
[Music]
This is Star Talk special edition. Neil
deGrasse Tyson here, your personal
astrophysicist. And if it's special
edition, it means we've got Gary
O'Reilly. Hi, Neil. Hey, Gary. Former
soccer pro. Yes. And I still I still
can't get out of my head the Google
search on you that delivered your wiki
page where you you got sexy legs on the
field on the pitch. I'll have that
deleted. How about that?
Today, this is a topic you and fellow
producers have picked. Yeah, it's
something we've been wanting to do for
quite some time and it's finding the
right guest and the right time to bring
it forward. So, we feel this is about
just about right. This is the right
time. Yeah. And then we combed the
streets and we found this guy. Yeah.
Harrison Greenbound. Not your first
rodeo with us. No. No. We love you,
Harrison. And you just finished a
production. Yeah. My off Broadway uh
magic show. What just happened? What
just happened? Are you going to take
you're going to take it on tour? Take it
on the road. Okay. Harrison
Greenmont.com. Harrison Green.com. And
you're a magic guy? Magic guy. I went to
Space Camp. You went to Space Camp?
Okay. You're in the right place. There's
a street credentials for this show. All
right. All right. So, so Gary, what is
the setup for today? In previous shows,
we have looked at many forms of
intelligence, uh, both artificial or
otherwise. Um, but where does
intelligence start? For that answer, we
look to the tree of life. More
specifically, trees and plants. Uh, we
know literal trees. Yes. Not just the
figurative tree of life. The metaphoric
kind. No, we know plants are aware of
their surroundings. But how deep does it
go? Can they communicate? Can they
count? Can they feel pain? Can they
learn? Do they have memory? What happens
if we send them into
space? Do plants know they are in space?
And how does this impact future food
production for space flight? This means
expert time. And I must warn you, he's a
fellow Brit, has a flowing white man and
a poncho for Hawaiian shirt. Neil, if
you will introduce our guest, Simon
Gilroy, welcome to Star Talk. Oh, thank
you for having me. Yeah, I've got you
down here. You're professor of botany at
the University of Wisconsin. So, there's
still botonist out there. You're head of
the Gilroy Science Lab. What a
coincidence. What are the chances of
that? I know.
Uh what we like here is uh your research
includes plant nutrition. Also, the why
we have you on this show is you think
about the surface of planets and and the
moon and what interaction a plant might
have with those surfaces because we
don't even call the surface of the moon
soil. No, no. It's like pulverized rock.
So, we call it
rigalith. Rigalith.
and your whole spaceleaning interest
interest us. And that in a way you are
not only an astrobiologist,
you're an astrobotonist. See, I didn't
know astrobotonist existed until I don't
want to brag here, but when I did go to
space camp, okay, we went on a fake
mission to the moon and I was the
astrobotist on the space shuttle. So, I
took care of a fake plastic plant and I
measured the effects of fake gravity on
this fake plastic plant for a full half
hour. And it was fake that you rode a
space shuttle to the moon cuz space
shuttles can't reach the moon. That's
right. None of it was real. But I did
have to take measurements of a plant.
They did not change because we were not
in space and it was made of plastic. But
I was a good space camp an astrobotist
for about a half an hour. All right. So
So Simon, let's lay the foundation here.
We know plants are alive, but how aware
are they? And do we have to loosen our
definition of the word aware to enclose
everything it is that they do? So that
we can speak of their properties in the
same sentences as we speak of our own
awareness. All biology is
aware if we use awareness as monitors
the environment around it and deals with
it whatever the appropriate dealing with
is because if you couldn't do that you
can't stay alive. The environment's
changing the lion is chasing you. The
insect is chewing on you. It's rained.
It's dry. You have to monitor all the
facts. So all that's an intrinsic part
of being alive. You just described the
world's worst honeymoon.
Insects chewing on you. Yeah. Lion
chasing me. The safari has gone ary. I
didn't say the world was necessarily a
benign place. In fact, it isn't. That's
that's why you have to be aware of
what's going on. You got to roll with
the good times and deal with the bad
times. Obvious things are they'd have to
track the sun. They know when the sun is
up and down and the seasons. These are
some obvious ones. Are there other ones
that are less clear and present to a
casual viewer? Yeah. Yeah. Um, so one
way to think about it is that we as
animals, we have the luxury of movement.
So if stuff happens around us, you don't
have to precisely know what's going on.
You just have to know it's bad. And then
then inevitably what we do is we vacate
the area where the bad stuff is
happening. If you're a plant, you're
you're rooted to the spot. Absolutely
literally rooted to the spot. So your
array of senses has to be broader than
our array of senses because you not only
have to deal with it, you have to know
exactly what's going on. So direction of
the sun, uh, but what's the time of day?
You have to know that because plants do
a lot of predictive biology. So if the
sun comes up, there's an absolutely
fantastic video of a sunflower doing a
thing called solar tracking. So
sunflowers put their leaves and point
them flat towards the direction of the
sun. Okay? And you could go, well, that
feels almost like a machine, you know,
it's that it's just monitoring the sun's
direction and pointing for the optimal
amount of photosynthesis. But if you
watch it, there's a great movies on uh
online of this solar tracking during the
whole day. The plant actually at the end
of the day it goes like and the leaves
flop down but then it predicts where the
sun's going to come up and the time of
dawn and it pops its leaves up
predictably to point to where's the sun
is going to come up. So it's got an
internal clock. It knows what the time
of day is. There's a lot of
environmental factors that I think if
you're a gardener you would just guess
it has they have to know this. They have
to know how much water there is. They
have to know what the nutrients are
around. It's kind of important if you're
a plant to know if you're being eaten.
Um, that's a big one. What the
temperature is, the time of year, and
just you can go through a litany of of
environmental factors, and if you can
imagine that it would impact on a plant
success, there's going to be a sensor
for it because otherwise plants wouldn't
be around. All right. They're describing
reaction to an environment that are all
positive for it. But if there's an
assault on the environment, uh what kind
of defenses might a plant have against
it? So again, you imagine you're rooted
to the spot. The kind of defenses that
you're going to have, they're not going
to be avoiding. There are a couple of
plants that can actually do incredibly
rapid leak movements. There's a thing
called mimosa, the sensitive plant, and
if you touch it in real time, it looks
like an animal. The leaves collapse
down. uh and we think that that is to
sort of like flick off a caterpillar or
make yourself just less obvious. So
that's a response to touch uh which is a
movement related one but that's kind of
the one of weird ones. The general
things what plants are really really
good at doing is making stuff.
Photosynthesis is an incredibly powerful
and productive way of doing biology. And
so plants build things to deal with the
world. So defenses can be pre-existing
built things, things that we would all
interact with, you know, things like uh
spines and prickles and just like the
barb wire approach to defending
yourself. Oh, okay. Of course. But then
one what they are real masters of is
chemistry and just making nasty stuff.
And there are an enormous number of
poisonous plants. all those um
psychoactive drugs which are extracted
from plants, they're not there for us,
they are there as defenses and those
defenses can either be pre-existing, you
know, they can just make the chemical
and just go, I'm defended or what is a
much sort of clever way to do it is to
go, I'm being attacked. I'm going to
make my defensive chemical now because
these defenses cost me something. So,
I'm just going to switch them on when I
need them. And so there's a lot of of
inducible chemical defenses. As soon as
a insect or a herbivore starts chewing
on a plant, it knows it's being chewed
on and it switches on just a ton of
stuff to defend itself. So none of that
happened with your plastic plants. Yes,
exactly. It stayed very actually space
had very little effect on it. Turns out
plants are great in space. Uh there was
zero change and the plant stayed uh
vertical the whole time. How about that?
I am nervous that plants are aware
because I've killed many house plants.
So, does that mean they know that I'm
like the Jeffrey Dmer of house plants?
Is that my do I have a reputation with
plants? We work a lot on that those sort
of like the sensory events and what they
trigger. And so, one of the things is
imagine you're eating a salad. You
didn't cook the salad. Everything in the
salad is alive. So if there is, you
know, that classic silent scream, that
silent scream is going on inside your
mouth as you're chewing on it because
everything is alive. Does that make me
not eat salad? Absolutely not. You know,
salad healthy for you. Uh but it is so
easy to just sort of forget that plants
are alive and that all biology again now
there's there's this linguistic
minefield that we're going to walk into
and I there's no way to get around it.
We should be stepping on those landmines
of of how we describe things because I
don't think there's a better way to do
it. We are going to use the language of
human experience and human consciousness
and how we work because you know that's
really the only relatable thing we have.
And so when we start talking about the
plants know they're being eaten, that
comes with a lot of baggage. That comes
with you thinking you're being eaten.
And you can't get away from that. That's
just built into the power and the
problems of language. So
plants are sensing what's going on
around them and responding. Does that
mean they know anything? Yeah. They're
not in harmony with
herbivores. I I thought they that's part
of the circle of life. But you're saying
they're pissed off. Yeah. They're
screaming for their life. I didn't
realize when I was eating a salad in
front of a plant, it was like eating
sushi in front of a fish.
So the thing is, Simon, I mean, we know
plants don't have what we would
classically interpret as a brain. So
what systems are engaged for their
communication, for their behavior? Uh,
it's a so we've now stepped to the edge
of our knowledge. Um, so okay, that's
the end of the show. Okay,
we're done here.
Oh no, remember the science is stepping
to the edge of knowledge and then
hypothesizing what the next step should
be. So we we I think we literally have
step to kind of we're getting into the
point of where there's active research
and debate about what's going on. So we
know a lot of the molecular machinery. I
want to pose Gary's question more
precisely. All right. So we attribute
our sensory world
to
neurochemical synaptic phenomena in a
very complex nervous system that we call
our brain. Given that if we look at
plants where we know there's no
corresponding
uh gathering of of of neurons then in
order to port our emotional state and
our sensory vocabulary onto a plant and
to do that uh botanically in a way that
makes botanical sense. Are you gonna
have to point where that is sensing it
and by what electrochemical means it's
reaction it's it's reacting? So we know
some of the the nuts and bolts the
machinery. So I can tell you how does
the plant sense light. I can tell you
the proteins it uses just like
biomedical researcher could tell you how
your eye works at that level. You know
the the nuts and bolts of photons coming
in flipping chemical bonds generating
signals. We also know that there's long
distance signaling with implants. So if
you again my favorite example is it's so
it's so easy to think about but so
complicated a caterpillar chewing on a
leaf. That's a very local event. So if
you imagine it's you imagine like you
know like a lion chewing on your
fingers, right? It's a very local piece
of stimulation but it spreads throughout
your entire body because you have a a
nervous system that transmits
information. So, we know plants don't
have nerves, they don't have a brain,
but they have that long-distance
signaling system because they have the
same problem that you know if you've got
a local piece of information, it's kind
of important that the entire organism
knows what's going on. The long distance
component of it is absolutely not
nerves. We know what nerves are and they
just simply don't exist in a plant. We
know what a brain is. There is no brain
in a plant um at the anatomical level.
But there is a long-distance signaling
system. And for that wounding system, we
know what it is. And it turns out it's
the plumbing system inside the plant
with liquid flowing in it. That liquid
carries chemical signals. Uh, and this
is where you go like really. One of the
chemical signals for damage is an amino
acid glutamate. That's like the MSG that
you put on your food to make it taste
yummy. Um, that's a basic building block
of plants. But when you damage a plant
cell, it leaks it out. MSG but without
the MS. Yes. Okay. So just G. Just G.
Glutamate. Okay. The G. So that that
glutamate is flowing through the plant
and it triggers longdistance responses.
So you can go to do a big analogy that
feels almost like nerve conduction,
right? It's a very different thing, but
it feels like the long distance um
conduction. Glutamate is a
neurotransmitter. You have it firing off
in your sinapses at the moment
transmitting information between nerves.
And there's a protein that has to be the
receptor. And in our nervous system,
that is a thing called, strangely
enough, a glutamate receptor. Uh, and
the glutamate receptors have a chemical
binding site, the amino acid, and it
switches on their activity.
plants have almost identical
proteins that bind glutamate and the
glutamate triggers their activity and
glutamate is part of this long-distance
signaling system. So, you know, there
there's lots of parallels about how
things work, but it there's a
fundamental difference which is no
nerves and no neurons. And if you think
that what your brain is doing is
building a model of the world somehow
encoded inside you is a model of the
world that you can interrogate and get
an idea about what's going on. Somehow
that must be true inside plants. It must
be true inside bacteria that somehow
they must have some kind of but now it
gets very philosophical. Some model that
they use in order to work out how the
world is working around them to respond
to it. But it's got to be it it's not
resident in a brain. Hey, start talking
ends. Listen, on April 24th here in New
York City in the East Village at New
York Comedy Club 8:00 p.m. I am doing a
show called F the Earth. It's a climate
comedy show and I know you care about
climate change because you are a Star
Talk fan. And what we are going to do is
have a lot of fun while we solve the
world's problems. So help me unf the
earth and join me on April 24th. Okay.
Okay. So the most aggressive plants we
we've all learned from childhood is I
guess the Venus fly trap. Is this Oh
yeah. But that's got we see it visually
and we fascinated by fascinated. But I
think Simon's going to tell us something
that we don't readily understand about
the Venus fly trap. Really? Yeah. Bust
my bubble here. But can the Venus fly
trap actually count? Absolutely.
Don't say that like everybody knows
that. What? What? Everybody in his lab
knows that. No way. He said that stupid.
You didn't know that? Well, he was
talking to me, not you. No worries. Has
that a mouth go what?
So, but like again it's like absolutely
it counts. What does it mean to count?
And so that Venus fly trap, the trap
thing, is actually some modified leaves.
Evolution has turned them into this
amazing trap. It's crazy. It's awesome.
You know, it shuts at our time scale,
which is why it's fascinating to us
because it moves sort of plant responses
into something that that feels almost
animallike. How does it close like that
at that speed then? It closes. So, one
of the things that blow your mind, it
grows shut. What? All right. which just
go like that can't be true. It uses the
machinery that elsewhere in the plant is
used to make cells get bigger and to
grow. And at the base of the trap are
some very specialized cells which are
just pumped up to incredibly high
pressures of water. And we're talking
about pressures that are in the realms
of you like 10 times the air pressure in
your car tire. Just amazingly pumped up
ready to go cells. And the machinery
just kind of loosens up the walls around
the cells so that they can expand
incredibly quickly. Uh and so that that
levering shut is cells getting bigger,
which is irreversible change in size,
which in the botanical world we call
growth. But the cool thing about it is
you imagine you've got the Venus fly
trap and the traps open and it's windy
or something like that and the leaf
falls into the trap. That' be crazy for
the plant to trap a leaf. But the trap
responds to touch. It responds to a fly
touching it. So what's happened is that
there are little sensory hairs on the
inner surface of the trap. And when a
fly touches them once, the plant
triggers a response, but it doesn't
trigger the shutting of the trap. It
triggers a chemical signal. If the fly
touches the hair again within a time
frame about 30 seconds, that then
triggers a second reinforcing signal and
that triggers the shutting of fat. So in
order to get the trap to shut, the plant
has to count to two. I mean, it's the
minimal counting you can imagine. Maybe
the minimal counting is one. So yeah,
there's a chemical uh signal memory
that's built up. When you get down to
the machinery of it, it doesn't sound
quite so magic, right? It's you trigger
something, you get part almost to a
threshold and then you trigger it again
and you pass the threshold, but it is
counting. It's it's accumulating two
pieces of information. So Simon, do
plants then begin to learn and can they
retain in a in a form of what we would
call a memory? Can they go from two to
calculus? I know, not quite that. Can we
teach them algebra? Algebra. They're
they're not into complex differential
equations. Yeah, they're like most
teenagers. Um, we will now firmly walk
into the minefield of linguistic issues
because we're going to talk about
learning and memory and eventually it's
you just you can't help but process it.
Well, I know what memory is. I remember
things and I know what learning is. I
learn things. We'll keep that in the
background. But I'm just going to use
those words because what else? These are
your disclaimers. We get that. So we
don't think you're crazy new age person
off a farm somewhere. I am I now the the
long hair mustache and Hawaiian shirt
are doing that.
You look like if weird saw a ghost and I
love it. My disclaimer is just so that
you are like have that filter in there.
So that like when we talk about well
what does what does memory mean? Does
memory mean an event has occurred
encoding it in your biology and then
using that information later? If I
define that as what memory is, right?
Which may not be the memory that you're
thinking about. you're thinking about
the memory of emotions and stuff like
that and past experiences. But if it was
something happens, it's encoded within
the biology and there is a response to
it later on or it changes other
responses later on. That's what biology
does, right? That's how you survive as
an organism is you adapt to what's going
on around you. The world's constantly
changing. We've already established it's
not always a nice place. And so being
able to change what you do with a
history of what's gone on, that's just
part of being alive. So, uh, plants do
that, bacteria do that. So, the answer
is yes. Yeah. But then when you start
talking about memory, you begin to layer
on all of these other things, which gets
a little bit complicated. But if we just
limit ourselves to that, plants have
memory. Whether it's cold will determine
what happens next many months down the
road. So, if you imagine um there are a
bunch of seeds in the soil at the
moment, some of them have a very clever
way of working out when they should
germinate. They want to produce a little
seedling in the spring when it's nice
and warm. And so, you could go, "Oh,
that seed's just going to sit in the
soil and it's going to wait for it to be
nice and warm." But nice and warm
increasingly is happening in the middle
of winter and it gets cold again. So if
it all you did was not have any kind of
concept of anything what is going on
around you other than oh today it's nice
and warm I'm going to germinate you make
a tiny little seedling and then that
seedling would freeze. So the a lot of
plants the seeds go into the soil and
they have to accumulate a long freezing
cold period and you can go well what
they're doing is they're sensing that
the temperature has got cold and they're
remembering that it's got cold for a
long period of time and once that memory
is in established then when it gets warm
again ah now we're probably in the
spring and we're not in that weird you
know like it's got warm for three days
and now it's minus 20 again. So there's
very clear that biology has memory at
that level. Learning again that's a
complicated one because generally in the
world of learning the learning that we
immediately think about again it's sort
of built into how we talk about it is
experiential learning which is what we
do where we experience something we take
that information in we processes it and
then that helps us do something in the
future. there's much less evidence for
that sort of of process in plants but
again we're talking about this
experiential component of it which is a
very very sort of animal human concept
so we're discussing here the internal
systems of plants but if we throw that
out into the communial aspect of it do
they and how do they I'm guessing it's
again biochemical communicate between
them or do they have other strategies
that they employ Yeah. Yeah. There
there's there's no no question that they
talk to each other. Uh the again, you're
right. The chemistry is going to be the
way they do it. That's also how I
communicate with chemistry. With
chemistry.
You know, if you mow a lawn, there's
that classic smell of new mow lawn. So,
what you're interacting then is with
this the volatiles that have come from
damaged plants. Uh and we know
chemically what those are. One of those
is a group of chemicals based around
hexadanal. And and if you smelt those
chemicals just in a lab, in a chemistry
lab, and you pulled out the the hexanowl
thing and smelt it, it would totally
smell of pneumon grass. If you take that
pure chemical and you treat a completely
intact, undamaged plant with it, it will
switch on a bunch of damage related
responses as if it was being attacked.
Lawns really didn't evolve to be mowed.
When you cut them, they think they're
being eaten and so they switch on the
damage related stuff of being eaten. So
the smell is just a bunch of silent
screaming death. Yeah, exactly. For
their lives. So take that chemical,
treat another plant with it, it will
switch on preemptive defenses. They have
an internal uh stress hormone, a defense
hormone called jasmmonic acid, which is
you can you know what it smells like.
It's in blood of and what is that
chemical? Jasmmonic acid. Oh yes. So the
the a large proportion will get switched
on. I only remember that because that's
my drag name. Jasmmonic acid. Jasmmonic
acid. Very good.
All right. So chemical given off by a
damaged plant switches on responses
another plant. Is that plant the
original plant communicating in the like
hand wavy way? Yeah. But I think we
would we would class it in a group of
communication called eavesdropping,
which is that there's there's no it's
very difficult to talk about it without
making it sound human. There's no intent
to pass information between those two
plants. It's just like go back to the
lion chewing on your hand. Again, if the
lion's chewing on your hand and you
scream, you aren't using the screen to
inform everyone else around you that the
lion is chewing on you. But everyone
else around you can use that information
to understand what's going on. So that
chemical sort of communication at that
level we I think we would think that is
this eavesdropping phenomenon which is
the information is useful and plants
have evolved to use it more plant-to-l
communication. Well we know that for
instance there are fungal bridges
between plants that work underground.
These things called microisal fungi.
They help the plant. They're in a
interaction with plant roots where the
plant feeds the fungus. The fungus helps
the plant. Is this the same thing as the
mcelium? The mcelium. Exactly the same
thing. Yeah. And but you called it
something else. What did you call it?
Microisal fungus. Microisal fungus.
Okay. I It's probably like Latin or
Swuahili or something for fungus weed.
Okay. But the it's a very very close
association. It's one of the oldest
associations symbioses that we know of
plants. It probably happened as soon as
plants came onto the lab. So information
will flow from plant to plant through
that that intermediary through that
fungus. But again, if we talk about
communication, there is this sort of um
language component to it where we're
putting intent in there and that may not
that may not be the right sort of
framework to put in what is happening
there. it it might just be again be e
eased dropping. What about plants versus
plants? Uh so plants know that other
plants are near them and they have other
things other than the chemistry to do
that. And one of them is light. So if
you imagine the closer plants get to
each other, the more one plant is
absorbing light relative to the other.
It actually changes the spectrum of
light that that each plant is seeing
because some of the spectrum is being
absorbed, some of it's being
transmitted. So the quality of light
changes depending on how close you are
to another plant. And one of the big
agricultural uh success stories which is
going to sound a little like is that all
it is but it's absolutely amazing. The
reason that pl that corn crops have gone
up. One of them is that we can plant
plants the corn closer to each other.
And one of the things that's helped us
do that is an understanding of this this
sort of proximity sensing the plants
have around them and working out how to
get around that so that we can basically
shove the corn plants really really
close to each other. I just scored so
many points with my Nebraskan in-laws
that we went to corn. This is this is
fantastic. They're going to be so
excited. They really love corn there.
They love it so much. So Simon, we've
we've discussed about plant smarts,
intelligence, etc.
But your lab, the famously named Gilroy
Lab, um does a lot of work with plants
in space. And the very first day
question is, do plants know they're in
space? If you do actually take them out
there? And just to be clear, yes,
generally when we think of space,
because we're trained to think this way,
we think of a weightless environment.
Yeah. But if you if you're either in a
rotating space station or your rockets
are firing, Yeah. You could do that at
1G. And so the space environment can be
thought of as zero G and or regular G,
but then other phenomenon like you have
to control the sunlight because you're
not on a rotating Earth, you know. So
you're whipping you be whipping around
it. Yeah. So how did you get interested
in space? Did you go to space camp with
with with
with Harrison?
I was that plastic. Yes, I took very
good care of you for at least 30
minutes.
As everyone will appreciate who's
listening to this podcast, space is an
awesome place. Everything is funner in
space. Everything. Yeah. You you can do
awesome experiments you could never do
on the surface of the earth. And for a
biologist, it moves into a realm
where there is no history for biology to
draw on about how to deal with it, which
is a very very weird mental space to go.
There is a movie. It's called Little
Shop of Horse and that space plant was
very dangerous.
So I mean what what are we confronted
with as now? Now I'm a plant. I've
joined the group. Um we one of us one of
us not grown here. So I mean radiation
you've got zero G is I mean there's no
up there's no down right. How are we
working with with our with our light
intake? Do we need water to grow plants
once we're off world? What go on what
are our challenges? So everything that
you know that if you're a gardener
everything that you know is important in
space. So what do plants need? They need
light, water, nutrients. They need
something to grow into. All of that is
going to be important. But we're going
to move into a realm and the one that we
uh uh concentrating a lot on at the
moment is that microgravity, the zerog
weightless environment. Uh and then
we're beginning to now transition to
thinking about things like the surface
of the moon. But if you think about the
weightless environment, that's a very
weird environment. You know, very
annoying. A lot of times physics gets in
the way of a good idea. Uh deal with
deal with it.
Physics is the ultimate judge, jury, and
executioner of your ideas. Just want you
to know. And the executioner bit is the
one that we're worried about. So a lot
of things you take for granted on Earth
are going to be different in a
weightless environment. And what the one
that just seems so trivial, but actually
turns out to be a really really big deal
is water. Because on Earth, you know, if
I say think of flowing water, almost
inevitably the picture in your mind is
going to be something that's driven by
gravity. It'll be a river flowing or the
ocean and tides and waves. Uh, and we're
going to remove that. And so the
characteristics of water in space is it
the molecular forces within water take
over things like hydrogen bonding and
stuff like that. But the great way to
think about it is that in space, water
is creepy and sticky. So, it wants to
stick to surfaces and it wants to creep
over surfaces. So, imagine I just to do
a thought experiment of you've got your
plant in a pot and you're going to water
it and you've got your watering can.
Well, first of all, you turn the
watering can aside. Nothing comes out
because can't pull the water out with
gravity. So, I'll give you a syringe and
you can squirt the water into the soil
and that will totally work. But now
rather than just sort of sitting in the
soil and being drawn down as it does on
Earth, the water is going to stick to
the soil particles and then capillary
forces are going to take it over the
surface of the soil. Then it's going to
hit the root. It's going to stick to the
root and then creep over the surface of
the root. And if you add too much water,
and let's be honest, everyone overwaters
their house plants. I feel like you're
looking directly into my soul when you
say that.
Like on behalf of all the other plants,
stop.
And you know what happens if you
overwater your plants? They're very
unhappy. And so sticky water encases the
plant. So when you say sticky, this is
surface tension and capillary action.
Absolutely. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Like
I say, physics is getting in the way of
a good idea. I just want to water my
plant and now I've got surface tension
and capillarity which become the
dominant forces. So can you grow plants
without water then? If water is such a
pain in the butt, can
Yes, there's another word. Can you grow
plants without using water? So, if there
is
one fundamental feature of biology and
it dominates how biology works on the
earth and it is one of the the guiding
principles of when we send probes out to
find life, liquid water is part and
parcel of the biology that we
understand. And we don't know how to do
biology without water. So unfortunately,
okay, we're stuck with water. Sticky and
creepy. Yeah. There's so many jokes I
want to make. Oh, don't hold back. Go
for it.
Really? I mean, if you just think about
getting off of Earth and going into a
low Earth orbit, going into space, we
are going to have to find lunar water.
But we're going to have to find other
solutions off of this planet. Otherwise,
you're just dealing with a payer because
you can't be bringing dirt, tons of dirt
to grow things on any sort of industrial
scale. Not a chance. Yeah. I think at
the moment it's feasible because we're
very very much in the sort of
exploratory world of like how are we
ever going to do this? What happens to
biology when it's in space? And we can
deal with, you know, the plant growth
facilities that we have on the space
station are awesome, but they are 2 feet
by 2 feet by 2 feet and they're not
designed to feed the crew. And feeding
the crew may not be the the eventual
goal. like, you know, self- sustaining,
completely self-sustaining with plants,
but getting to the fresh fruit and
vegetables thing where it supplements a
lot of the the freeze-dried food that
may be in our like at least in the near
future, but psychologically as well,
growing plants turns out to be quite a
big deal. Being in a spacecraft, if
you're an astronaut, astronauts,
absolutely the most awesome job in the
world, but you're in a built
environment. You're in a very small
enclosed space for many many months and
you're with let's say five of your
closest friends and at the end of that
journey you might only have zero close
friends left, right? It's just such a
hard hard environment at a psychological
level and it's very built and you know
on the space station you can see the
earth but you can't get back you know
and and so growing plants at a
psychological level that may be the only
justification that you need in order to
take plants with you on a long journey
is that they are very very calming and
nurturing something and growing it and
then eating it I mean that that would be
a pretty awesome goal for an astronaut.
Okay, so naively coming to this as a
physicist, uh you just put a seed in the
soil and it grows, right? So in zero g,
how does it know what direction to send
a root versus what direction to send the
leaf? A B, when you get to the moon,
that's not soil. And earth soil is full
of nutrients and microbes and and
there's a whole relationship. Yeah. That
the plant has with what's going on
already in the soil. Not so much on
Earth or Mars. So what's your plan to
feed astronauts on the space? Not not
only on the space station, but on on
world. What' you say? On world. Off
world. Off world. Yeah. Biology is
awesome. Biology is incredibly robust.
Plants grow. Okay. In space in that
microgravity world and the shoots grow
in the direction of the light. So that's
an easy one. And you know we we build
growth chambers into space that are like
growth chambers on the earth with lights
at one end. We'll call that the top.
Wait, wait, wait. If it's in the soil,
how does it know which way the light is?
If it's buried in the Well, the roots
have a random distribution. So as the
roots go through the soil, that
directionality is completely lost. How
are you sensing light if you are covered
in dirt? How deep do you plant?
You're planting, you're burying. Light
penetrates soil quite deeply, especially
red light. So, there is there's a
gradient. There's your answer. Okay. Um,
there's my answer. Okay. So, okay. So,
we're talking about Earth soil and I
think having decided we're now Luna
based or using regalith lunar regalith.
How are the challenges when you're
saying, well, there are zero microbes or
there are lunar microbes and there's no
what we would classically define as
dirt. There's just this rubble. So, how
how how is that experiment coming along?
So, growing in lunar regalith is plants
is challenging at partly at a nutrient
level. So, you know, there's there's a
lot of the nutrients the plants would
need, but it's locked up in chemical
forms which are not immediately
accessible, right? So, you could imagine
you might chemically process that lunar
regalith or you might use microbes and
and you know seed some regalith with the
microbes that then turn over the rock
and then make it available to the
plants. One of the biggies which is a
it's a limit to a lot of plant growth on
Earth is nitrogen. So biologically
available nitrogen form of like nitrates
or ammonia. Uh that's what plants want
to take up and there is zero
biologically available nitrogen in
regalith on the moon. There is nitrogen
there. It's been deposited but it's just
not in that nitrate ammonary sort of
chemical form that plants could take up.
Okay. So on Mars which is also has
equally hostile surface chemistry. We
learned from Mark Wattney in the movie
The Martian that you you just just slap
some poop in there and and put a little
seed in it. It took us how long to get
here?
I was on a countdown as soon as he
mentioned nitrogen. Got nitrogen. I was
like, "The poop is coming. The poop is
coming." So you you want fertilizer. He
made poop potatoes. So can can you And
he was a botonist. He was an authentic
bot. Even though he was an actor playing
a botist, he was a botnist. So, how
authentic was that solution to his food
problem? If only that had been a
documentary, it would have been
awesome. But there's a lot of good stuff
there in in like the science behind it.
Take human waste, you can compost it and
process it, and you can turn it into
fantastic nitrogen-rich fertilizer. That
that's all done by microbes, but you
know, human waste has a lot of microbes
in it. You have to process it. You can't
use raw human waste at many many levels.
One of them is that, you know, the
reason we don't use raw human waste is
there a tremendous possibility of
getting parasites and things like that
in it. And you know, they're by
definition they're going to be bad for
humans. So that's one reason. And the
other is that it's an incredibly
concentrated form of all of those
bioavailable nutrients and you need to
process it. So imagine that there was
composted that would work but you know
composting is going to take some time.
The other aspect of it is I seem to
remember he shoveled Martian regalith
into the habitat and then just planted
in that and there are some issues with
Martian regalith which are more than
just it doesn't have all of the
nutrients. It's um very salty which is
generally bad for plants but it also is
very high in a group of chemical called
perchlorates and perchlorates are toxic.
They're toxic to people. Um so you can
totally go down the poop road. Um it's
not far-fetched. It requires some work.
Down the poop road is the name of my
next comedy special. Yeah, that's just
that's a keeper. Look for it on Disney
Plus. Yeah, that's a keeper. Right. So
what you're saying is and I and I grant
sort of whole passes to movies in this
way all the time. What you're saying is
he meant well in this intent. So you
give it to him because you had to think
about fertilizer. You had to know that
the Martian soil was not was hostile to
plant life. And so all the rest of those
details you you give him a pass on that
because he he went there at all in the
story line. Is that is that fair? That
is absolutely fair. And also he gets a
lifetime pass because he made botney
cool. Yeah. And that that is a feat. He
said the attractiveness for astrobot is
very high.
No, it's an interesting point because I
take for granted that any space movie is
going to have physicist and
astrophysicist in it. So we're we're in
all the movies, but you got a botist
like where did he come? Who ordered
that? Well, see, look, I mean, the the
question now becomes, do we need in our
future generations to become space
farmers and therefore we would need
astrobotist? Then we're going to need
these guys. Now, you work with NASA's
gene lab, correct? With some your
experimentation.
Yep. So, are we are we looking at our
own experimentation with plants here on
Earth? So for things that are drought
resistant, fire resistant, you know,
work in extreme conditions, has that
empowered the sort of experimentation
you're thinking about bringing to space?
Because we have a lot of variation of
conditions here on Earth, plants. Plus,
why is it that all it takes to grow a
perfectly healthy plant is a crack in
the pavement.
That's a fair point that if a plant
could survive in New York, it can
survive on Mars. Crack anywhere.
thriving in the crack of the pavement.
I'm saying take that, transplant that
into the space and then then you get
something good there. We're in the era
of big data and so NASA has this what
gan lab is is basically a data
repository where a lot of data sets just
are being brought together from around
the world. a lot of things like uh we
have technology which will allow us to
ask in an organism which genes get
switched on and which genes get switched
off in space across every single gene
that that organism has. So one answer to
that question of how how are we sort of
navigating this world towards a space
crop is we're still in the discovery
phase of trying to work out what happens
to biology in space. So, we're getting
all of this sort of characterization
that's coming back and we're using that
to go, well, what do we think happened
to these plants while they're in space?
Did they feel like using the fuel? Did
they feel like they were um they were
under drought conditions? Did they feel
like the light was high or low? You
know, and we're getting that sort of of
landscape. And then we can go to plants
that exist on Earth and go, well, do we
have plants that deal with that? And is
this a characteristic that we can sort
of take and then build into our
spacecraft world? And then the other
aspect of it is that it doesn't matter
how great the plant is. If the goal is
for an astronaut to eat it, there's a
food science component of it, they want
have to want to eat it. You know, being
in space is tough. Astronauts tend to
have suppressed appetites, you know, and
having something which is like just the
absolutely the freshest best thing that
they want to eat is another component of
that. And so we have to bring in all of
these these various aspects of what a
successful space crop is going to be.
Oh, do we know if like a space tomato
though tastes like a earth tomato? Like
do that do they taste the same if we
grow them in space? They taste like
space.
Uh, so I think we know that chilies
grown in space, they've been grown
through an entire crop to harvest the
chilies. Those chilies pretty much taste
like chilies. The tomatoes I don't think
they have been tomatoes have been grown
in space. Uh, I don't think we know what
they taste like. They taste like
tomatoes, not tomatoes.
That's what Sorry. Sorry. Tomato. Yes.
Their box was made of aluminium.
Yeah. Thank you. See what you did. Yeah.
So, you get polymorphism in animals,
Simon. Polymorphism. That was also my
drag name. Polymorphism. You reinvented
yourself so many times. I I forgot what
is polymorphism. So, when you get a
species and all of a sudden you'll look
at say three birds next to each other,
they'll be the same bird, but there'll
be different colorations. So, do you do
you get that in plants? And is that any
benefit to the research to all of a
sudden it in reinvents itself and one of
those three could become something that
has a benefit to conditions that you So
this is like this is these are the
forces of natural selection. Correct. In
this case so at an individual level
plants show a form of of sort of growth
and development that we call plastic. Ah
we have very rigid growth like your
parents knew exactly what you were going
to look like when you grew up. Did they?
Did your parents know you were going to
look like weird if you saw a ghost?
Weird. They knew I had one head, two
arms. There it is. There it is. But for
plants, you can't necessarily predict
how many branches. And you know, they
they they their growth is sort of
entrained to the environment, right? So
we would call that plastic. They sort of
they're malleable in how they're going
to grow, right? You're not going to grow
a third arm just because you needed one.
I mean, that would be incredible.
Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. So the other the
other thought now we were talking about
the polymorphism is if you've got you're
on an exoplanet, you want to grow stuff.
Plants that have been green, do they
because of an atmospheric change, a soil
change, they're no longer green, they go
red or they change to a different
different color. Is that a plausible
development in these areas in these
environments? I think with the how
photosynthesis works, we have a pretty
good idea of the molecular underpinnings
of that. It's an amazing machine, like
mind-blowing machine. Yeah, I guess it's
difficult to think that those
fundamentals will change like our moving
our earth biology onto Mars for
instance. This would just be kind of the
way I would imagine it. I think
photosynthesis is going to be
photosynthesis. Let let me come at it
from a slightly different angle. I
agree. Photosynthesis is going to be
photosynthesis. It's a highly successful
way to convert light into all of your
energy needs. Got it. But as we go
forward, as we have greater and greater
command over the genomes of life, what
is to prevent you and your brethren from
just creating a life form by gene
editing, gene stitching, gene
assemblies, and to create a life form
that can eat the regalith, that can eat
the that can thrive without, you know,
in UV. Why? What's to prevent that from
being the future, rendering all of these
experiments obsolete because you're just
creating the life form you need. So that
might sound sci-fi, but the idea of
being able to engineer traits, yes, that
that's real modern palm biology. That's
going on sci-fi at all. So you could
imagine that we might be able to take
the basic machinery of photosynthesis
and hook some different pigments into it
in order to power it with a different
part of the spectrum of light. That is
engineering built around a piece of
biology that already exists. And that's
totally doable. Say it. It's called GMO.
Say it. Genetically modifying organisms.
Okay. You don't want to say it, I'll say
it. Uh, no. It is genetically
modificating.
Modificating. English. English is now my
second one. Genetically modifying
organisms. So if we're genetically
modifying, are we then ultra reliant
upon the development of microbes to be
equally as beneficial in these
environments? Oh, because it needs the
whole rest of the the the ecosystem.
There you go. Oh yes. So you can grow
plants under sterile conditions and
they'll they'll survive. But the really
stable biology is ecosystems where
there's forget the animals, you know, do
you really need them? Like microbes and
plants working together. That's how a
lot of the stability is built into
ecosystems on it. I mean, the animals
are important as well. I think everybody
wants a space dog. This is part of the
challenge with bringing back the
mammoth. You can bring back the mammoth,
but how about what the the plants the
mammoth ate, which are all extinct
today, and other things in the mammoth
environment. You can plunk them into
today's very lonely eating Twinkies, you
know, whatever.
So, I' I'd like the idea of
photosynthesis using other wavelengths
of light. That that's brilliant. That'd
be one interesting. But we have plants
on Earth that do that anyway, do they
not? Yeah. Yeah. We have plants that
make different pigments that feed into
that basic machinery. Yeah. So it's the
blueprint, pun intended, is is basically
there to be developed if if that's
what's required. Is that right? Yeah.
These are ideas. These aren't sci-fi
ideas. These are ideas which are being
played out as we're talking now. All
right. So, just to bring some closure to
this, it's not good enough if you're
going to serve the needs of astronauts
to make a plant that we can all admire.
You want to make a plant that they can
eat. So, we're talking tomatoes. We're
talking watermelon,
tomatoes. We're talking watermelons,
mangoes. Is that a pipe dream or are you
going to make some kind of plant that
has all the proper nutrients but tastes
nasty?
Like, we shouldn't have space kale.
Nobody wants to go to space just to eat
kale. That would be What's the point of
going to Mars and that's all that's
there? I'm staying on Earth. Yeah, I've
seen it on Earth. This is going to be
very disappointing for you. Oh, no. Kale
is a target crop.
Hilarious. Someone has a sense of humor.
Perfect. Go to space garlic or something
to change the taste. I ain't going to
space. Yeah. No, thank you. Well, wait.
How about mushrooms? How about
mushrooms? Yeah. Yep. Yep. Mushrooms.
But tomatoes are a tomatoes. Sorry.
They're a target crop as well. Biology
is an immensely powerful force and it
has shaped organisms to be really really
good. We're moving them into a like this
weird environment of space. But throwing
away millions and millions of years of
evolution of making organisms like
affected is a crazy strategy. I think we
should capitalize on what we've got so
that the crops which are going to be
manipulated are going to be the crops
we're used to. And also, why would you
want to engineer crazy crop that is not
like almost like the comforting crops of
home? If we're thinking of people on
Mars there for multiple years, there is
that element of the psychology of being
there, which is fantastically important.
And I I just think that the you know,
there are some things that you would
like to take with you and maybe parts of
your cuisine are going to be part of
that. Kale kale is not one of them that
there's no nothing comforting about now
they got the kale space chicken space
kettle space lamb I will take whatever
weird GMO plant over kale
and just just to verify you can grow
mushrooms right I mean I I would go for
porttoella mushrooms that that I'm into
grilled porttoella I'm good absolutely
yeah I mean the steak that goes with it
might be problematic.
All right. So, Professor Gilroy, we
learned a bunch. Yeah. And as a minimum,
I learned that there's such a thing as
an astrobotonist. Yes. We love that. And
it gives us hope for what may be the
space fairing future of civilization,
not just the chosen few who uh get to
visit that domain. Because what has
always been true and will continue to be
true, Earth's surface is the shoreline
of the cosmic ocean.
And kale is it seaweed?
Let go of the kale. There's too much of
it and it doesn't taste good.
All right, this has been a delight. And
uh Harrison, we'll find you on the road.
Yeah. Harrison.com. I got tour dates.
I'm running around taking the show on
the road. Yeah, absolutely. All right,
Gary. Always good to have you, man.
Pleasure, my friend. All right, this has
been Star Talk special edition, the poop
potato version. I would take that over
chaos.
Until next time, I am Neil Degrass
Tyson, your personal astrophysicist.
Keep looking up.
[Music]